trying to persuade him to try the decathlon?
No, I never did.
We didn't have decathlon way back there.
We didn't in the early, I mean they had it, but we didn't have, we didn't have it.
The, all right, this is now, because Randy's in the 64 and 68 Olympics, so you've been here about 10 years.
The athletic director
officially ended up quite often in that time being the head football coach.
Right.
And what was it like to work with Gene Stallings as the athletic director?
Well, Gene was a great guy.
I mean, he was a dedicated football coach.
And the first thing I learned when I came to Texas A&M, Bone Durbin told me that football pays the way.
And everybody knew it.
See, we didn't even charge for a track meet, all right?
Everything I spent probably came out of football budget.
And Bone said, he said, here's something else.
He said, basketball loses more money than your whole budget is for track.
He said, that's how much money they lose.
He said, everything we spend is made from football.
So from word go, and I knew that, you know.
I knew that we didn't have much money in those days.
So, I mean, I really worked with all football coaches.
But Gene Stallings was a great guy, and the only thing, he had a conflict with Randy one time.
Describe that.
Well, see, our only discus ring, shot ring, was out in the back of the place out there, out behind the scoreboard.
Well, the football field was back further back.
I mean, we had the discus ring marked off.
The football practice.
Yeah.
But at the end, like when you throw the discus, you were throwing towards the football team.
But it was back further enough where he couldn't throw far enough to hit the player.
But anyway, we were out there one time, and here comes this manager in his white uniform.
He ran up.
I was gone, but what happened, he sent this manager over there, told Randy,
to quit throwing, afraid he was going to hit somebody.
And Randy told the manager, he said, I can't quit throwing, I'm trying to go to the Olympics.
And they don't ring a guy, I got to throw here.
So anyway, then stalling, I hear what happened, because like I said, I had my freshman track team, we went to San Angelo, and we were gone.
But I heard about all that when I soon got back, Randy, Mr. Meeks, and Bones River, and everybody ganged up.
But the bus rolled up there full of my freshmen.
I had about 35 or 40 just full of all my freshman track team.
In those days, freshmen couldn't go to Southwest Conference Meeks.
We had a regular freshman track meet.
We roll up there at the end by the stadium, let the kids out.
Well, everybody ganged up there and they said Randy Mattson's leaving, going home coach.
I said, what the matter?
And they told me about the story, what the deal was.
And sure enough, he was packing up to leave.
He was packing up, and the dean of the head of the
Oh, who was the guy that was, he's the head of the department that controls the athletics.
Five, four or five on that committee that's over the.
Oh, the faculty athletic council.
Yeah.
He came there and he, you know, he went back over and talked to Randy and, I mean, everybody.
And then in about two or three hours, these two guys from Houston showed up.
I mean, I don't know how the word got around so fast, but those, the two that brought him down to the village, they both came down here to keep him from leaving.
Didn't also then, didn't somebody contact Mr. Rudder and Mr. Rudder contacted Gene Stallings?
Not to think so.
Yeah, I think so.
And it evaporated.
Yeah.
In all of your years working with Randy, what was the happiest moment for you?
What were your proudest— Well, him making the Olympic team and— Did you get to go to Mexico City?
Well, I was going, but—
Let's see, that's when Billy Pickard got sick, the trainer.
And see, the Olympics in Mexico City was during football season.
All right, Pickard got run down, and they had to send him into the hospital.
He was taking uppers and downers or whatever.
And he was so busy that he was living in the training room.
He had a cot.
He never went home.
But he was having, him and his wife was having a little trouble too.
But anyway, Pickard got sick.
And Gene said, Charlie said, you're going to have to take over and be the trainer.
Because I had my trainer's license, you know.
I was a qualified trainer.
And doctors, you know, doctors come down to practice every now and then.
And if you had trouble, you'd just send a guy to the hospital, this and that.
But anyway, I said, well, Coach Dalton, I can't go to, I can't be an athletic trainer.
I said, I got to go to the Olympics in two and three weeks or something.
He said, I already got my tickets.
And the Aggies, see, they,
And it was the Houston guys, I think, but they bought my plane ticket in two weeks and went to the Olympics and all that stuff paid, everything paid for, you know.
So I'm going watch Randy throw the shot for the Olympics, you know, that's a big deal.
You know, you can't go.
You can't go.
You got to be the trainer.
He said, what's more important, Texas A&M or Randy Mattson?
I said, well, I guess Texas A&M.
Well, you got to be here.
So I had to give up and be the trainer.
And I went to about five games with the trainer.
And I missed the Olympics.
This is another editorial note.
I asked Randy one time about his proudest moments.
and he said one of his proudest moments was standing on that pedestal or whatever they call that platform when they played the national anthem and he was holding the gold medal.
He said to win that for the United States made him very, very proud.
All right, after Coach Stallings leaves, Emory Ballard became
the head coach and athletic director.
What was it like, what was he as the AD?
He was real good.
Emory was real good.
In fact, he, for his track, he was great.
Emory used to be the head and meet director for the big high school meets in Brackenridge.
And Brackenridge had a great
sprinter, and I recruited a guy at East Texas.
His name was Clyde Harris, and he was just right under Bobby Marr.
I mean, in fact, the first time he raced, he almost beat Bobby Marr, and that's how I got to know Emer Bellard through the recruit that I had at East Texas State, and he played football.
He was a great football player.
Everybody would have wanted him, but he had a bad shoulder or something.
He decided he wasn't going to ever play football.
He was going to run track.
how I got him to go to East Texas.
Nobody else knew that.
Everybody thought he was going to play football, but he was Emory's coaching, but Emory knew how to, I'd go up there and visit with Emory.
We were putting on a big track meet and he would tell me some things I'd do, you know, how he did this and how he did that.
It was good to recruit him back and forth.
I mean, he was for the track team and all of that, but he'd bring the football team out on, we may have a big track meet going on in spring, spring training, he'd bring the football team out and make the track team all sit down and be quiet while they worked out for an hour and a half, you know.
That just killed your whole, you know, I can't imagine anybody doing that myself, but of course football is king B.
And he had not yet met Tom Landry.
That would change his life.
I just thought, let's back up to Randy.
Describe Randy throwing the shot put at Kyle Field for the last time wearing an Aggie uniform as an undergraduate.
Well, that was, well, what we did the next year,
They made a concrete, they made a real good shot put ring.
And it took a tractor.
We had to get a tractor to move that tractor out to the middle of the football field.
They had such a big deal over that.
Instead of them making them throw the shot put out in the country, they moved it on the middle of the football field.
So anyway, he was getting ready to set the world record.
And Meeks, SM Meeks was an equipment manager.
He marked off everything.
All right, he told me, he said, Charlie said, I got Randy Mattson's food.
He said, I marked off his ring.
And he said, I got the world record where he thinks he got throat to win the Southwest Conference or whatever, you know.
He said, when he hits that line, he thinks it's just normal.
But he said, he done broke the world record.
I said, oh, you can't do that.
He said, don't tell nobody, just between me and you.
He said, Randy will never know.
And sure enough, boom.
I mean, he throws it out there.
He set the world record.
Do you remember saying anything special to Randy that day before he threw the truck?
Were you aware that he was ready to... Well, I was aware he was ready to throw that good because in practice, we went out
The week before, he didn't throw much during practice.
He picked up the shot, and he throws one time.
If it's a great throw, he'll only throw it once or twice.
But he threw three times, and all three times broke the world record in practice.
So I knew he was ready.
Let's see.
Before we leave the 60s and 70s,
of coaching.
When did track practice begin?
In the fall you did the running, but when did y'all really get down to the events that each
Well, we had everybody working out on the cross-country course.
Later on, I hired Ted Nelson, and he hit me.
But we would both coach on the cross-country course right in the grass, out in front of Kyle Field or on the highway coming in by the drill field.
And every day, we'd have everybody to meet out there.
And then we would mark off two 20-yard dashes or quarter-mile, and we'd have
like high jumpers would run 10 or 15 repeat 220s and we had everybody running and just getting them in shape and we didn't do much field event practice because we couldn't because we had to coach cross country you know and I didn't feel like it I ought to go out there and
during cross-country season, leave the cross-country team and go coach the high jump, I mean.
So we'd make the field event guys or have them to come in early a lot of times or late.
We'd work it out for at least one day a week we had to coach everybody.
I mean, this is in September, October, November, you know, you got to get started on doing all that.
You just had to work it out before you could do it all and it kept you busy from daylight to dark, you know.
And this was five days or six days a week?
Five days a week.
Then during the winter, because indoor track was not given much emphasis then, how did they change in January or February?
Describe the spring workouts.
Well, that's when the indoor really started, and it started way back there.
I remember Ted Nelson ran in the first indoor track meet, and we went to track meets back in those days where they would just be a flat concrete place, and they'd mark off things, and you had to run in tennis shoes.
And Texas Tech, though, they bought a board track way back there.
And they put on this meat out there in Lubbock.
And they flew a plane around and picked up A&M, picked up Rice, and five or six teams.
and flew them out to Lubbock, and we did that for four or five years, and that was way back there.
And then we'd go over, in practice, we'd go over here to the horse, what do you call it, the little concrete building they got where they put on?
Pavilion?
Pavilion.
And I'd get my, somebody would go in there with a tractor, and we'd grade that thing down,
and even mark it off with line, mark off a little track.
And it wasn't like 130 yards around that thing, you know, hard to sprint around it.
But we worked out in it for several years.
And then we'd also take a pole vault, set up a pole vault deal in there.
And then when they built this new gym down there, new building on the highway, we went in there
worked out every year.
So we worked out indoors when it was, you know, just to learn how to run those short turns indoors.
But Ted Nelson was one of the greatest runners I've ever had.
Describe recruiting him.
All right.
The year before, I signed a guy named R.E.
Merritt, all right.
Andrews High School set the national record in the mile relay, and they won state in the 440 and the 880, and I mean, they were great.
They were the best track people.
in the United States or in the state of Texas.
So I signed R.E.
Merrick and he was, you know, get him down there and he was a senior and I wasn't thinking about Ted Nelson because R.E.
was a stud then, you know.
And then when I get R.E.
down here, of course, Ted was running great and Ted ran 46-2, I believe, in high school and went out to the Coliseum Relays.
You know, the Coliseum Relays are strictly Olympic type people.
But Ted Nelson gets invited to go to the Coliseum Relay.
And we go out there and watch him run and everything.
And he gets second, third.
But anyway, he's high caliber.
And did you know his coach well?
Oh, yes.
Knew him real well.
And then after Ted comes down here, Ted is such a great
runner and knowing all about the high school coach was super.
I mean, he come down here right now and he's been athletic supervisor for all the big track meets.
He's been coaching in Dallas and he heads up all the big track meets in Dallas.
And they invite him all over to be the head knocker for like Big 12 meets and Southwest Conference meets.
He's been there with Southwest Conference meets in the last 30 years, being the, what do you call it, the head?
The starter?
No, the man who makes the rules.
Oh.
I don't know the thoughts.
Well, if somebody gets disqualified, he's the one that does it, you know.
But anyway, but going back to Ted, Ted held 13 A&M school records.
And, I mean, he could run a hundred, he set the school record in 100 yard dash, 200 yard dash, 440, and then all the indoor races and things like that.
So, Ted was so good and so knew how to train and so dedicated in workout.
I mean, he would do a workout twice as hard is what I would suggest for somebody in a 220, you know, had different workouts for every event.
So, after a while, I said, Ted, would you sit down and write down your whole workout?
Workout for the mile relay.
Workout for the 440 yard dash.
Workout for the 220.
He wrote all that down.
Well, from that day on, I started using Ted Nelson's, my runner's workout.
Hell, he knows more.
I got thinking about it.
Well, I was a sprinter.
I ran 100 and 220, you know.
And he ran a 440 in my relay.
I didn't know how to train.
I said, this guy's a whole lot better than me.
So he must know more than me.
So I started using Ted Nelson's workout system.
Ted Nelson's deal was, I mean, he's sort of like Randy Mattson.
I mean, big buddy, you better run like if you're running 10.
repeat two 20s with a minute rest in between them.
You don't get a minute and five seconds rest.
You get one minute rest.
And if you're, like in cross country, we run six repeat miles and 430 a mile and you get two minutes rest.
See, in cross country, we had a roof where no one could stop for two hours.
And the way they rested in between, like if they run, sometimes you run 10 repeat miles
and have three minutes rest in between the miles.
The way they would rest would be jogging.
I mean, you could not sit down, you could not stop, stand still.
And everybody, you'd have 15 or 20 guys jogging around and you'd be talking to them, you know, they'd ask you questions, but everybody's jogging.
That's the first thing, distance runners cannot rest.
I mean, they got to learn to run, you know, a long time.
But anyway, Ted Nelson was great.
And for an athlete as splendid as Ted,
He's a little shorter than average, isn't he?
Yes, uh-huh.
But he was also stronger.
I mean, he had big, strong legs, and it made him more powerful, which I think it helped him in the, especially in the 100 sprints, you know.
A lot of the great sprinters are short, little people, you know, but they got big, strong muscles.
Now, did you keep
No, he went to, he got the assistant job at Bryan High School.
He coached one year and he was assistant track coach at Bryan and then Marvin Tate got in and he was athletic director and I talked to Marvin.
I told him I just had to have an assistant coach and somebody to hit me.
I could do all this and so Marvin
The first year he raised money, A&M paid for half of his salary.
And he raised money through some Aggies to pay for the other half.
That's how limited A&M was, you know, as far as money.
I mean, we were skimping all the time.
I think I told you that we had a roof where I couldn't invite but one guy in for a plane visit.
Now when Jackie Sherrill, now you didn't ask me about Jackie Sherrill, but Jackie Sherrill comes in and he's the difference between daylight and dark.
He calls a meeting of all coaches in all sports the very first day he's here.
And Jackie Sherrill said, I want every sport to be number one.
And he said, Charlie, he said, why don't you go to Jamaica?
Why don't you go to Africa and recruit?
And I said, Coach, I can't fly.
I don't have any money.
I can't make trips.
He said, Charlie, you got an unlimited track budget now.
He said, I want you to get out and recruit.
You got to bring in some athletes.
We want to build up this program.
And I think maybe he told all the other coaches that too.
I mean, it was altogether different for us.
And he said, another thing, he said, I don't want the track team to ever stay in a rundown place.
He said, you pick out the most expensive and the best hotels in town, and when you go somewhere, you stay in the best there is.
He said, that's A&M's number one recruiting gimmick, is we travel like first class people.
And it went from down here to up here.
And then I sent somebody to Jamaica.
I sent somebody.
I mean, I didn't go.
I sent somebody to Africa, an assistant that I hired.
And Jackie Sherrill hired him and gave him a football.
graduate assistant and all he had to do was be my assistant track coach.
How long did that unlimited budget last?
Till I left.
Till?
Uh-huh.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
Did you have some, did you have some guidelines that you yourself practiced though about spending money and?
No, I just used the same.
I never spend any money much.
Because you didn't stay at the best, you didn't stay at the highest price place.
Well, we stayed, we always stayed at good hotels.
Yeah.
But, I mean, he just didn't want you to go to a bad place, you know.
He wanted, he wanted us to have reputation of doing good.
Now, when Jackie was the, officially the athletic director, who was the person on a day-to-day basis that you worked with?
Because he wasn't available, I'm sure, all the time.
No, uh-uh.
Who would you turn to to get a question and answer?
Well, Wally Gross.
Wally?
Uh-huh.
Wally was all, now Wally, I want to recommend Wally, too, because Wally has stepped up.
I mean, he's made everything first class.
It was Jackie and Wally together, really, because.
Wally was at that time officially the business.
Yeah, uh-huh.
All right, when Cheryl left, who followed him as athletic director?
Does Wally move up about then?
I believe that's when he moved up.
Okay.
But we always went to Wally's office all the time for everybody.
I mean, Wally knew all the rules, how much money you had and all that.
He took care of all that.
Now, you retired in what year?
In 90, 1990.
In the late, in the 80s, Cheryl and on up to, how often did the entire athletic department get together?
How often did the coaches have meetings?
We didn't, I don't think we had any more.
Well, we had a coaching meeting where it was on campus.
I mean, it wasn't for the family.
It was just.
No, but the athletic department coaches, you all didn't meet once a month or once a week?
How did you know whether or not the athletic director thought you were succeeding?
What kind of feedback did you get?
Well, we, a lot of times we'd have recruits that we would both try to recruit, you know.
Jackie is, the first one we recruited, black guy out of Houston that was a stud, and we got him down here, but he hurts his leg, and he never did do real good, but he was, he was, he was sort of like Curtis Dickey type guy, you know, he was, he was real good, but anyway, Jackie would
talk to you about him and, you know, I'd take guys in to visit with him and he'd get me to talk to their guys, stuff like that.
Throughout all of those years that you were the head coach, do you remember the athletic director ever calling you in and saying, hey, don't do that, don't do this?
Uh-uh.
Well, Gene Stallings was the only one who ever said don't do anything.
And like one time, I was sitting down at a track meet.
And he kind of jumped on me about sitting down.
Coaches need to stand up, you know.
And one time, Tom Chandler had a baseball game.
He was leaving.
He was walking across pulling a bat.
Just, you know, he jumped on him about pulling that bat.
And then he gets on me.
See, I'm his trainer.
for football, for five football games.
I'm his head, I'm his trainer.
All right, he was number one.
He had three studs, I can't even remember, the quarterback.
They went to conference, football.
All right, he had this tall thing up there.
You know, he'd get up there.
He hired, Carpenter, Johnny, come up here.
Well, I started walking up, you know, climbing up.
He said, I said, come here.
Boy, I had to go up there like a butt, you know, and get up there.
You see, he called me up there two or three times, kind of chewed me out.
I'd call it chewing it out, you know.
But the deal was two of his star football players got hurt.
Well, I sent them into the training room, you know.
They wasn't capable of playing football, so he jumped on me.
Not really jumping on me, but really serious.
Why did you send so-and-so in?
I said, Coach, he's got a sprained ankle or hurt his shoulder.
I said, he may be able to come back out.
He said, you sure about that?
I said, yeah.
I said, you don't want him to be out for the whole year.
I said, you send that guy out there right now and he gets hurt.
I said, he's out for the whole year, not just for an hour or two.
He said, OK.
Little deals like that.
During all of those years that you were the head coach,
What were your personal guidelines or rules that you yourself tried to practice?
What did you, what kind of plan did you follow?
Well, just never, I'm always early.
Never be late.
Out of all my 40 years of traveling and coaching, I was always early.
If I was going to meet somebody like a prospect, I was going to visit them.
If I said 3 o'clock, well, I'd be there at 2.
And I'd go in, drink coffee.
Anyway, I was always early.
I'd never late for anything, just like going to work.
If I was supposed to be there at 8 o'clock, I'd be there at 10 minutes to 8, you know.
And it started like that.
If a member of the track team was late, what punishment did you give in?
Well, I just kind of overlooked it.
I mean, they didn't mean too much.
All right, other guidelines for you.
What about, did you ever, if you were trying to chew a kid out, if you were trying to get him to do better, how did you?
Well, I've had quite a few of those things.
Not really, but the main thing is we used to go on, if they didn't do so good, I mean, you're coming in on, say, a half scholarship.
We'd have it kind of lined up.
If you go uphill, we'd give you more money.
If you go downhill, we'd cut your scholarship.
All right, where I got in trouble over that was when I took over the women.
And I tried to coach the women like I coached the men.
Well, that's a little bit different there.
Well, there were some girls on the team that I recruited and they come in and I found out after a little while that all the girls would gain about eight or ten to fifteen pounds in about three or four weeks or a month.
I don't know what the deal was but it was their age and the changes, you know.
So I put in a rule that all
Well, everybody, we had that roof, everybody.
Every Monday, I believe it was Monday, everybody had to weigh, and I had a chart there.
Well, after a while, the girls, some of the girls, they quit weighing.
And I'd get on to one of them, and I mean, they'd just say, Coach, I'll never be weighed.
I'll never do that.
Well, you know, what am I going to do now, you know?
I can't.
Am I going to kick her off to any coach?
You won't weigh, you know?
Little things like that.
But you just kind of overlook some things, and I find out that, you know, the girls are going to gain weight.
But anyway, several of those girls, I would cut down a little bit off the scholarship because they were getting slower.
I said, you can't gain 20 pounds and run faster.
If you're going to run faster, you've got to lose 25 pounds, you know.
And that didn't dawn on them to start with.
And then when I, I don't know what the other track coach did, but they only scored one or two points in two years.
And see, I had 16 full scholarships.
And the women had 21.
And they scored two points.
And John David fired him.
So he called.
I might not already tell you this, but John David called me up there and said, just fired the track coach.
He said, I want you and Ted to take over.
He said, will you be interested in taking over?
I said, yeah.
You know, I could just see him getting a big raise, man.
I'm going to take over the women's program.
I'm going to get a big raise.
He said, would you be interested in taking over the women?